Johannesburg - A Free State businessman has been ordered to apologise to a travel agent he described as a “skelm” (crook) during a WhatsApp exchange and pay her R50 000 for defamation and injuria. The dispute between travel agent Johanna Magdalena du Toit and businessman Michiel Coetzee started in 2018 when the latter asked to cancel bookings he had made for a trip to Spain with his life partner. Du Toit advised Coetzee that the bookings could not be cancelled. Coetzee did not take kindly to Du Toit’s response and angrily replied in Afrikaans: “Jy is ‘n skelm (you are a crook)”. He added: “Ek dink jy is ‘n skelm (I think you're a crook).” In her reply, Du Toit told Coetzee that “ek glo dit, jy seker jou kinders gaan haal? (I believe it, I am sure you are going to pick up your kids?)”. She continued: “Ek al voor jy die goed gestuur het die antwoord gehad (I already had the answer before you sent the goods). Maar geweet jy stuur dit met brawade want jy het my klaar gespyker en geweet dit kan nie omgedraai word nie  (But did you know you sent it with bravado because you finished nailing me and knew it could not be reversed?” Du Toit became emotional as this was the first time she had been insulted by a client in that manner in two decades as a travel agent. One of her colleagues, fiancée and family later informed her that Coetzee had also told them she was a crook, she stole money from him and that he would never do business with her or Travel Counsellors, the company she works for, anymore. Du Toit launched the action against Coetzee, claiming damages for defamation and for crimen injuria. In his response, the businessman did not deny making the utterances he was accused of and to the group of people. He said he was sorry and did not intend to cause any harm to Du Toit or her family as they are his friends. The Bloemfontein Magistrate’s Court dismissed Du Toit’s claims and found that he did not intend to cause harm. The court was satisfied that after applying a proper interpretation of the words used by Coetzee, they did not have the necessary intention and did not act unlawfully. It also found no evidence that the esteem Du Toit was held by any of the witnesses had been diminished. Aggrieved by the decision, Du Toit appealed to the Free State High Court last year. She told the high court that Coetzee knew her family and singled them out as the addresses of his defamatory statements to cause her the greatest humiliation and embarrassment. Du Toit complained that Coetzee published the defamatory statements to other people that she cheated him and stole from him. She also felt that his apology was made for the first time in his testimony in the magistrate’s court and, therefore, not genuine but an afterthought and that the defamation was perpetrated over a number of days despite threats of a civil suit against him. Du Toit demanded R75 000 for defamation and R30 000 for injuria to take into account the consumer price index and the fact that the rights that she sought to protect are constitutional rights. Last Thursday, Acting Judge Molefi Litheko, with Judge Mpina Mathebula concurring, said there were three essential elements to establish an action for injuria include an intention on Coetzee’s part to produce the effect of his act (animus injuriandi [intention to defame]), an overt act which the businessman is not legally entitled to do, constituting an infringement of Du Toit’s right resulting in an impairment of her person and dignity. ”I consider an amount of R30 000 for damages for defamation and R20 000 for damages for injuria just and equitable in the circumstances,” Acting Judge Litheko found. Coetzee was also ordered to pay Du Toit’s legal costs. The Saturday Star