Johannesburg – Former State Security Agency (SSA) and correctional services boss Arthur Fraser has opened a criminal case against President Cyril Ramaphosa. Fraser released a statement on Wednesday indicating he had opened a case of defeating the ends of justice, kidnapping of suspects and their interrogation on his property and bribery with the Rosebank Police Station. “The details of the charges and the supporting evidence, including photographs, bank accounts, video footage and names, are contained in my statement filed with the Rosebank Police Station,” he said in the statement. Fraser said the charges emanated from the alleged theft of millions of US dollars, above four million US dollars, which were concealed within Ramaphosa’s Phala Phala farm in Waterberg, Limpopo, by criminals who were colluding with his domestic worker. “They also include defeating the ends of justice, kidnapping suspects, their interrogation on his property and bribery. The President concealed the crime from the South African Police Service and South African Revenue Service (SARS) and paid the culprits for their silence,” he said. The statement indicated that the evidence he provided showed that the burglary occurred on February 9, 2020. BREAKING NEWS: Former State Security DG Arthur Fraser has just opened a case against President Cyril Ramaphosa at Rosebank Police Station pic.twitter.com/wQvhG5086o Fraser, in the statement, added that Ramaphosa's conduct and those involved constitute a breach of, inter alia, the Prevention of Organized Crime Act, No. 121 of 1998 (POCA) and the Prevention of Corrupt Activities Act No. 12 of 2004 (the Corruption Act). “I trust that the police and the prosecuting authorities will investigate this matter without fear or favour. I also trust that the President will take the nation into his confidence and accept or deny that the events I described in my affidavit occurred on his property,” he said. Fraser’s lawyer, Eric Mabuza, confirmed that his client had opened a criminal case against Ramaphosa. “The statement is legit, and I can confirm that my client indeed opened a criminal case against president Ramaphosa at Rosebank Police Station, where he also admitted his evidence." Police on Wednesday confirmed that a case was opened at the Rosebank Police Station. Spokesperson Colonel Athlenda Mathe however, would not say if it was against Ramaphosa. “The South African Police Service can confirm that a case of money laundering, defeating the ends of justice and kidnapping has been registered at the Rosebank Police Station this afternoon. The SAPS confirms that due processes will follow,” Mathe said. Reacting to Fraser’s criminal case against Ramaphosa, EFF leader Julius Malema said the party would call for the President’s arrest. “We can’t have a president who is behaving like a gangster. Ramaphosa didn’t open a criminal case when they were a burglary at his place. Instead, he tried to take the matter into his gangs like a gangster.” Attempts to get comment from Ramaphosa’s spokesperson Vincent Magwenya were unsuccessful at the time of publication.