DURBAN - DA member of provincial legislature Martin Meyer says the party has called upon KwaZulu-Natal Legislature Speaker, Nontembeko Boyce, to urgently convene a special meeting on political killings. This follows the murder of ANC councillor Thembinkosi Lombo in Greytown on Friday.Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said the murder was being investigated by the Greytown SAPS. “It is alleged that on 25 February 2022 at 13:15,  a 35-year-old man was driving his vehicle on Durban Street in Greytown, when he was approached by a gunman. He was shot multiple times on the upper body and was declared dead at the scene. The circumstances surrounding the incident are being investigated,” said Mbele.Meyer said the DA would write to the Speaker on the matter and request that the meeting takes the form of a Debate on a Matter of Public Importance. MORE ON THISMurder of ANC Umvoti Local Municipality councillor could be an ‘inside job’ says leaderNFP says it has become aware of a 'plot' against its Nongoma councillorParties welcome breakthrough in political killings in KZNProgress being made in political killings cases in KZN, says Cele“The move comes after yet another councillor was gunned down on Friday last week, this time in Umvoti Municipality. The DA is saddened by the murder of councillor Thembinkosi Lombo in what is the fourth such political murder in KZN since October. “Sadly, it seems that infighting within the ANC is continuing to cost lives and destabilise municipalities in our province,” he said.Meyer added that he felt that Premier Sihle Zikalala did not talk about political killings enough in his state of the province address last week. “While he did highlight the killing of traditional leaders, he failed to mention any clear plan on how to deal with it.”Meyer added that the matter must be debated and a way forward established. “The DA remains hopeful that the Speaker will accede to our request. The premier must account to the people of KZN. For too long, they have had their lives endangered and affected by ongoing ANC internal strife.”Nomusa Phungula, spokesperson for the KZN Legislature Speaker Nontembeko Boyce, said that the speaker has received the request from the DA. “I can confirm that we have received the request from the DA and the Honourable Speaker is processing it. She will respond to the DA in due course, then comment further,” she said.THE MERCURY