DURBAN - The Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment Minister Barbara Creecy has set the record straight on the disposal of 1 500 tons of toxic chemicals off St Helena Bay by the vessel NS Qingdao.The vessel had a chemical reaction after its cargo came into contact with rainwater while discharging the cargo in the port of Durban. Concentrated toxic fumes were released into the atmosphere. The vessel was anchored at St Helena Bay.Creecy was responding to a parliamentary written question by the DA’s Cheryl Phillips, who wanted to know the names of the chemicals that were dumped and the measures the department was taking to reduce the toxicity of the dumped chemicals.Prior to the parliamentary written question, the DA’s Dave Bryant and Chris Hunsinger had called on Creecy and the South African Maritime Safety Authority to account to the parliamentary portfolio committees on the environment and transport regarding how permission was granted and whether the potentially devastating consequences of the dumping have been properly investigated.Responding to the parliamentary question, Creecy said the constituents of the chemicals disposed of to avert a serious environmental disaster (and remarks) were:MORE ON THISSamsa continues salvage work on vessel anchored at St Helena Bay after it was evacuated from the Port of DurbanNS Qingdao’s salvage operation progressing well after unstable chemical cargo dumpingNS Qingdao salvage operation at Port of Saldanha Bay to continue into March161 tons of sodium metabisulphite: A reducing agent, sensitive to water and air, and should be kept away from oxidisers, eg. nitrates. Generates fumes if in contact with acids.371 tons of ammonium sulphate: Incompatible with oxidising agents, nitrates, chlorates, copper and zinc. Generates ammonia, nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulphur oxides on decomposition.221 tons of sodium carboxymethyl cellulose: A combustible material to be kept away from oxidisers, e.g. nitrates. Produces CO and CO2 on decompositions.202 tons of calcium formate: A combustible material. Produces CO, keep away from Oxidisers.148 tons electrode paste: This material is combustible, but will not ignite readily. Burning produces heavy smoke. Generates NOx, SOx and Cox.360 tons of magnesium nitrate hexahydrate: An oxidiser kept away from combustible materials and reducing agents.121 tons of caustic calcinated magnesite: Non-combustible. Reacts with acids. Water will react with magnesium oxide to form magnesium hydroxide and release heat and steam.In total, there were 1 684 tons of chemicals left on the vessel.Creecy further explained that in order to reduce the concentration of the chemicals, the following methodology was implemented:The material was disposed of in small quantities at a time and over a few weeks to substantially reduce the toxicity levels.The vessel was travelling at a speed of two knots whilst the disposal was conducted to further facilitate rapid dispersion of the material.The material was disposed of some 250km offshore, at 3000m depth of water, to prevent immediate coastal impacts.Moreover, the following monitoring was conducted:Photographs and videos were taken during and after the disposal operations and were provided by the permit holder.Satellite imagery of potential algal blooms was sourced by the department.Aerial surveillance (using drone technology) of the disposal activity was conducted over the period of the disposal and was continually reviewed and assessed by the department.Daily News