CAPE TOWN - The Cape of Good Hope (CoGH) SPCA, has appealed to the public to donate toward vet bills for fire victim baboons who suffered during the devastating blaze that raged for nearly a week in Kleinmond.The fire in the Overstrand ravaged 5 417 hectares of vegetation earlier this month.CoGH SPCA has now called on the public to assist with veterinary bills which has already exceeded R20 000.“This bill will be increasing daily with having the vets in the field to assist us with the darting. Then there will also be ongoing treatment of the injured baboons, to rehabilitate them back to good health before being released back with their troop,” the organisation said in a statement. A juvenile baboon named Kelly, is among the primates being nursed back to health.“Kelly sustained severe burn wounds on her hands and feet. She is currently receiving emergency treatment for her severe burn wounds at our Wildlife facility in Grassy Park. We are very hopeful that Kelly will make a full recovery. “Our team, along with Baboon Matters and volunteers, have been searching the area since the beginning of (last) week. We are estimating another nine baboons that require intervention. We have a wildlife veterinarian on-site that is assisting us with the darting. Unfortunately the terrain does not make it easy for our team, and we have been struggling for days, and finally we were successful yesterday with the darting after we set up a luring station to lure the baboons to an open area where it is easier to access and dart them. We had to apply for an urgent permit from CapeNature in order to do this as it is illegal to feed wild animals,” the CoGH SPCA said. Baboon Matters said the main body of the troop, about 22 baboons, headed off across the fire ravaged mountain to a green valley, leaving a group of about 12 injured baboons hiding out in a ravine. “Despite the most determined and valiant efforts we could not get to the vulnerable baboons, and had to plan most carefully so as not to frighten them more. We have all strategised and have a new plan...  In the meantime, please keep these brave animals in your heart and thoughts. We have not given up and will continue to do everything we can to get relevant care to them as quickly as we can,” Baboon Matters said. To make a donation to the CoGH SPCA:Bank: Standard BankBranch: 025309 / 051001 (internet banking)Account Number: 071832858Account Type: ChequeAccount Name: The Cape of Good Hope SPCABeneficiary Reference: Baboons & Your NameOr you can make a donation via the CoGH website: https://capespca.co.za/product/once-off-donation/Cape Times