DR. LEHOHLA CONDEMNS MARCH AGAINST FOREIGNERSIt is time that the country took a serious look at immigration. While attention appears to be focused on African foreigners taking away jobs from locals, employers are not called to account for their employment policies. Why target only Africans? What about the large number of Pakistanis who specialise in running hairdressing salons, convenience stores and cellphone repair and accessory shops. Once, a few get into the country then their relatives come into the country in droves. I do not have an issue if they enter the country legally. The question is whether these foreigners are here because of the scarcity of skills in these areas. Why are locals not encouraged to be trained in these trades? DAN REDDYAfrica and its leaders must sort their countries and stop trying to sort South Africa. If they are serious about Africa they must govern with integrity then meaningful treaties can be entered into. How can we have a free trade area with such imbalances in Africa? Any African leader who raises his voice must be of clean governance! DU DUBEIt is really sad to see South Africans think of other Africans as a threat to them while they have forgiven the Europeans and Asians for all the atrocities and oppression they have brought to Africa. Why are Africans not united and building a united states of Africa instead of using these oppression borders to lead us into hating and fighting one another, while we harbour the descendants of misery and poverty. ALEX DANIELSMINISTER MBALULA VISITS PORT OF DURBANIn the beginning, they stole the maintenance budget, then the upgrade money disappeared. What are the chances of any investment seeing the light of day? LEWIS MORTAFor Mbalula’s project to succeed there would be a need to limit access to labour unions from entering the port and ANC cadres then employ real working people. They should also be paid very well to avoid unnecessary strikes. LANGA MBULIThe Minister of Transport is one of the most underwhelming individuals in South African politics and in government. I will say this upfront,  I do not think this will work in the manner that he is suggesting. But, for the sake of our province I hope it pays off. MARK SUTTLEODDS AND ENDSAssault on councillors continues unabated in KwaZulu Natal, ours is a State of uncivilised savages. ROBERTService delivery is very poor. The call centre for the eThekwini Municipality does not work. No one picks up. LBPrince Salman of Saudi Arabia encourages learners to study Hinduism. Look, I have no problem with seeking knowledge about cross cultures and all religions, but top priority should really be human rights instead! ESEFormer chief justice, now retired Mogoeng Mogoeng, should not apologise to anyone for his comments on pro Israel. As a South African free citizen he is entitled to choose who he wishes to associate with, and does not need to offer an explanation. There are many readers who write to this paper and other publications spitting venom against Israel, America and lndia almost every week, and almost everything they write is hate speech or propaganda. They are not asked to apologise because readers recognise it to be fake news or hate speech. So leave the good judge alone. NARESH SINGHPresident Ramaphosa has reaffirmed his and the ANC's support for the Constitution, which obliges them to protect the lives and property of their citizens. Does his statement mean that he and his government will now copy the road safety measures which dramatically reduced road crashes, collisions, road deaths and injuries in so many other countries? RICHARD BENSON