DURBAN - Xubera Institute for Research and Development has elected various members from various movements to mobilise communities in an effort to fight inequality and reclaim the local economy aimed at supporting black communities.Speaking to the Daily News, Xolani Dube, who founded the institute, indicated that the organisation would have fresh faces, including members from various political formations, with one common goal – to learn from other existing forums that prioritise certain groups of people and advocate for their interests.“We can’t control the social ills if we don’t control the economy. In many places around KwaZulu-Natal, certain groups of people have monopolised certain businesses in their suburbs because they understand the value of securing such businesses and never allow outsiders to take over. They do so because they want to build a future for their own children.“If we do not guard against foreigners invading townships and villages they will soon have the land and this Constitution will protect their rights. Some of the key institutions are already in the hands of the Western pharmaceutical companies. These institutions belong to the forces outside our country and our lawmakers are making sure that they remain in those hands, and they are paying them very well.”Dube said that Xubera started doing its work to try and educate people about the importance of not allowing foreign invasion through organisations and businesses that have no interest in ending inequality.MORE ON THISLocal government elections: Revise voting age to 16, says EFF's Julius MalemaRamaphosa harshly criticised during Marikana memorial lecturePhoenix racial tension doused for nowUniversities owed R14 billion in student debt“We have said as Xubera that we need to ensure that no children of our powerful politicians must work with us because they bring problems as their names are attached to the movement, we don’t want to associate with them because we cannot afford to be called ‘a faction’ of certain politicians.“We will mobilise and create a movement that will deal with the issues we have. We are crafting an agenda for black people, bringing together a united agenda regardless of political affiliation.”He added: “We need to build an economy according to our culture. Black people must have an economy that attracts all black people. The reason AfriForum is so powerful is that they have an objective to protect their interests – not the interests of their members, but their race.”Dube emphasised the need to clearly understand how the movement would use the economic transformation policy to end poverty among black communities and revive communities.“We are not judging anyone who is alleged to be corrupt. What we need is to work together to create a better future for our children. Create a home of the natives. Those who were kicked by the system must never be rejected; we must welcome them and show them the way.“We need to understand the war in the society that divides black professionals. Hence you will never find white journalists insulting each other in public, but black people do so easily without shame. We need to understand what creates that personal hatred.”Dube felt that black people were in deep trouble because they had no purpose. He was also of the view that the natives would continue to suffer if they did not end the hostility that exists among them.Daily News