LIFESTYLE - Durban-based biokinetist Tas Chetty offers these tips to help kick-start your healthier new year routines:*RUNNING: A great way to keep your mind and body healthy and fit.A 20-minute run, three times a week has plenty of benefits which include:*Weight control*Improving cardiovascular fitness,*Increased  bone density*improved overall wellbeingHere is some important information for anyone who wants to start running or return to running:*Correct Running Shoes: Purchase a good pair of running shoes designed for your arch and stride type. If you're not sure which type of shoe you need, visit a local running specialty store to get fitted properly.*Start the run with a warm up first: Before you start a run, you need a good warm-up routine, which includes dynamic stretching to get the blood flowing. Leave the static stretching for the post-run routine. Dynamic stretching includes walking lunges, butt kicks, high knees and toy soldiers — straight-leg kicks that stretch the hamstrings. Dynamic stretching will increase your flexibility and help prevent injuries by strengthening your muscles and joints. After doing some dynamic stretching, walk briskly for five minutes, then speed up to a comfortable jogging or running pace.*At the start: your focus should be on total time and not on distance covered, this will come later. Don't worry about how fast you are running. Speed will come  once your aerobic base has improved. Increase the duration of your runs graduallyA good starting point is to schedule to walk /run for 20 - 30 minutes, three times a week for the first four to six weeks.Start with running for one minute followed by four minutes of walking, repeating this interval four times for a total of 20 minutes.Each week you decrease the time walking by 30 seconds and increase the time running by 30 seconds.You continue at this rate until you are running 20 minutes comfortably.It is important that your first runs should be completed at an effort and pace that is easy and comfortable.Most beginners don't know what an easy or comfortable pace should be so they tend to push too hard.A comfortable pace is one you feel confident you can sustain for the duration of your run.It is better to run too slow and finish feeling like you could have gone longer or faster, rather than finishing exhausted.*After each run: When you finish your run, don't stop suddenly. Instead, walk for another five minutes to cool down gradually followed by  static stretches.Be sure to give yourself enough time between runs to recover. The general recommendation is 36 to 48 hours between runs for beginners.*Already a runner? Here are a few ways you can up your game or challenge yourself:A runner passes in the Pincio park in Rome. (AP Photo/Andrew Medichini)- Choose a goal: If your running routine started off strong but has lost momentum it can help to have a goal to focus on. Why not start training for a 2022 half marathon, or even a marathon? It would give you plenty of time to work on your technique, build your strength and improve your diet.- Focus on your for: Focus on perfecting your form (and not pounding yourself into the ground). Thinking about aspects like stride, gait, and posture can boost your long-term running health while keeping your mind engaged and present.- Speed it up or hit a hill: Fartlek runs push you to change up your speed and effort throughout your run. It's supposed to be free-flowing and unpredictable so while you run pick out a random marker and commit to running harder and faster until you hit it. Then slow back down again and take a little time to recover. These aren't intervals though so don’t stop running completely. If speed isn’t your favourite thing to run then maybe incline is. Adding in some hill runs will not only help work your leg muscles, making you stronger and less susceptible to injury but the new challenge is sure to renew your motivation.BASIC CARDIO CIRCUIT FOR HOMECircuit training is a workout based around stations that you move through continuously, with little or no rest between them.It is a great way to get the benefits of strength and cardio training in a short amount of time.Basically, you'll set up stations for different types of exercises, work at each for a set amount of time, and rotate from station to station quickly, keeping your heart rate up while challenging different parts of your body.Here are a few key stations you'll find in a good circuit training workout:*Lower-body station (both legs)*Upper-body station (arms)*Lower-body station (single-leg)*Core station*Cardio stationTypically, you won’t need much of a break in between stations because each station (and exercise) within the circuit targets a different muscle group whether it’s strengthening your legs or challenging your cardiovascular system.This is different to interval training, in which you alternate between high-intensity moves and low-intensity exercises or rest periods.Circuit workouts typically consist of five to 10 stations, each of which corresponds to a muscle group or cardio. You can structure your session based on spending a specific amount of time at each stations, performing a specific number of reps at each station, or a mixture of both,*A basic at home circuit you can do with no equipment:Do each exercise for one minute and then rest one minute before starting the next round.Complete three rounds for an 18-minute workout.– Body weight squats– Push-ups– Reverse lunges– Plank– Mountain climbers– Tricep dips*When is the best time to do a circuit workout?There are various thoughts and studies on when the best time is to exercise.The goal however is always to build consistency in your exercise routine so the right answer will differ from person to person.Generally, working out in the morning is better because it’s easier to commit to and get done before the day’s responsibilities get in the way.Muscle strength, flexibility, power output and endurance are all better in the evening but many people feel tired after work or school and thus could find it difficult to find motivation or time to exercise.The key is to find the time that works for you and your life.*For more tips and advice follow Chetty on Facebook.