DURBAN - Motorbike rider clubs throughout Africa held the Ubuntu run simultaneously on Sunday to promote the spirit of unity and social cohesion.Riders in South Africa and other African countries left for their short destinations on Sunday.In KwaZulu-Natal the Ubuntu Run had an estimated 200 motorbikes from Durban, South coast, Kokstad and the Midlands. Bikers gathered in Pietermaritzburg’s Northway Mall and rode to Greytown where they stopped at the Durban Road robots.They were expected to meet with about 150 bikers coming from the North Coast, via KwaDukuza (Stanger) and Kranskop and the inland groups, as well as about 150 bikers, via Weenen and Muden. Their intention being a mass ride to King Edward Park in Greytown.The Africa Ubuntu Bikers Run Facebook page said bikers attended the Ubuntu Run to promote the three core pillars of motorcycling. The pillars are loyalty, respect and honour.Motorbike rider clubs throughout Africa held the Ubuntu Run simultaneously on Sunday to promote the spirit of unity and social cohesion. Picture : The Africa Ubuntu Bikers Run “(The) Ubuntu Run, has continued to grow over the years. In our pursuit to unify the masses, we do fairly understand that we all come from different backgrounds, different cultures, different races, different countries, different upbringings, different family values, etc. Thus, uniting in our diversity has been a building block to the success of our past five runs,” read a statement.“It would not be fair to talk about organised biking without mentioning the biker code of conduct, a code respected by all who subscribe to this way of life. It is also important to note that bikers are not gangsters but family men and women who are actively involved in the economies of all countries where they are represented in Africa,” the statement continued.The following countries in Africa, namely Botswana, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Ghana are participating for the first time on the Ubuntu Run. They join Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Nigeria, Uganda and Kenya. Egypt hosted their Ubuntu Run on Friday as per the  Arabic calendar.Nkagisang Maduo, of African Bikers Brotherhood Forum, said African Bikers are united in spirit. He said some countries participated in the Ubuntu Run for the first time and their execution was “immaculate".“We have come a long way as a biking fraternity in Africa. Our economic growth is steadily growing. The more we grow economically, the more we can compete with the rest of the world in everything that they do.”Daily News