DURBAN – Snake catchers are standing in solidarity after keyboard warriors on Facebook complained about the recent rescue of a python in Ballito, north of Durban.In a Facebook post on Saturday, snake catcher Samantha Cumming said she contemplated just not saying anything at all after she rescued the python, but felt that with the amount of messages, phone calls and emails, she received support and otherwise it would be rude not to.Cumming said on Wednesday evening she responded to a call for a python in Minerva Road in Ballito, north of Durban.“The rescue was a tad “bumpy” and perhaps a little “jumpy”, as some have pointed out,” Cumming said.She said each snake species required different skills when doing a rescue. Mambas were different to cobras and bush snakes different to heralds. Pythons were in a league of their own.MORE ON THISEastern Cape man catches puff adder, bags it and takes it to the police stationSnake repellents do not work says the African Snakebite Institute and KZN snake catcherSnake catcher bags two black mambas of over 3.1m each in a case of mistaken identityWATCH: Python living under rocks at Wilson’s Wharf hailed for solving rat problemTwo green mambas caught after they slither into birdcage and eat three finches“They are strong, they are big and they have teeth that could rip flesh apart. My python skills are bumpy and they are jumpy, but I went, and did my utmost and managed to contain the snake without any harm or injury to her. She was released healthy and happy,” Cumming said.She said she received backlash for the method she used and the fact that she seemed nervous and inexperienced were both true.“I was nervous and my experience with pythons is minimal. This is not something that I am ashamed of as the majority of the calls I respond to are for cobras, mambas, vine snakes and our beautiful harmless species,” Cumming said.She said snake catchers all had one species of snake that intimidated them. Pythons were beautifully frightening and she was intimidated, for now.“The size of the capture box I used was acceptable for that snake. Videos can be misleading. Snakes prefer dark, tight spaces as they dislike feeling exposed and vulnerable,” Cumming said.“I will not stop rescuing snakes as many have suggested and I will continue doing everything I can to prevent conflict between the misunderstood and humans.”“Thank you to those that have shown appreciation and support,” Cumming said.The python crossing the road in Ballito on Wednesday night. Picture: FacebookOn Friday, snake catcher Neville Wolmarans gave his perspective and clarity in a Facebook post on the Ndlondlo Reptile Park Facebook page.Wolmarans said Cumming contacted him and responded that he would only be available after an hour and that she, in spite of her lack of experience with pythons, should get there and do the best she can to capture the snake.He said the capture was not exactly "textbook" and every snake catcher had to adapt from time to time but was certainly respectful of the snake which could inflict nasty bites.“The snake was not injured, no member of the public put at risk and Samantha herself unscathed,” Wolmarans said.He said it was a good capture which was executed by a good handler that stood tall and did what nobody else on the scene was prepared to do.“All those keyboard warriors with so much to say and complain about have probably never done similar captures under similar circumstances,” Wolmarans said.Fellow snake catcher Steve Meighan said he saw the video and as a snake handler with many moons of experience under his belt, he stood behind what happened and how Sam handled the capture.“She is used to other snakes and less familiar with pythons (especially big ones). I feel she did well. I also feel that any keyboard warrior out there that wants to put her down because of it must remove themselves from my FB before I find them and remove them myself. I am shocked and discussed at the levels of hate, jealousy and pure lack of respect and support shown to people in this industry toward fellow catchers. I am done with it all and will not tolerate it on my own platforms at all … Nobody got hurt, snake included, and that is what matters.”Jakobus Petrus Tjokkie Roets said he and his dad were slandered in a group on how they went about rescuing and relocating a big python.He said some of the comments painted a picture that most of the group's people have no idea about the strength and damage a python that was not used to being handled can inflict upon a person and kept indicating that they were not trained and not experienced.“We have had five python rescues and countless dangerous/venomous snakes as well over the last 15 years. We were also trained and certified by ASI (African Snakebite Institute) so I also feel for you …” Roets said.Daily News