The funeral of David “Boikie” Kupane was sombre affair attended by his family, friends and members of the Soweto community. Pics Bhekikaya Mabaso.lesego.makgatho@inl.co.zaMOURNERS gathered at Fourways Memorial to bid farewell to the founder of one of Gauteng’s biggest, long serving and popular undertakers Kupane Funerals - David Boikie Kupane.Kupane died peacefully at his home in Joburg in the early hours of Friday morning, January 21, in the presence of his family. He was 83.Kupane founded his funeral services in 1970 and his establishment was the burial of choice for not only ordinary people but also politicians, celebrities and sportsmen and women alike who preferred his ability to cater to the needs of every class.He buried paupers and princes with the same respect and decorum and he ran a very tight and professional business - the envy of many entrepreneurs.He was moved by the plight of the poor who couldn’t afford burial costs so much that once, for a minimum of R30, a person was guaranteed a full funeral service by Kupane. Many of those who didn’t have ready cash to bury their loved ones, can attest that Kupane would never turn them away and would allow them to make suitable arrangements to repay him once they’ve amassed money from relatives and the community.Soweto community members who've been patrons of Kupane Funerals said his passing marked a great loss to the people of the sprawling township because his establishment was like an institution.“Kupane Funerals has been our family funeral parlour,” said Miriam Nkwe.The Sowetan mother of four from Rockville attested that Kupane has had a major impact on not only her family, but many families in Soweto.“We've come a long way with Kupane. We all remember Bra Boikie. He was loving. We all remember Kupane Funerals was the main funeral service in Soweto before anyone else came in the game. He's made a huge impact. He's shown us it is possible to make it as a black man in any sector you want to enter,” said Nkwe.“They were very professional and so helpful. They took care of us and made sure the funeral process was smooth. Boikie did a great job with Kupane. He was always hands on. Kupane Funerals will always be a big part of Soweto,” said another mourner.Even though Covid-19 protocols were followed, mourners came out in numbers while funeral proceedings were also followed virtually on social media.Kupane’s son Molefi who was around his father during his last minutes said his family is proud of his father’s achievements and the love he showed toward his community in Soweto was unconventional.“There lies a person who has done a job on earth, he will be missed with a broken heart,” lamented Molefi.Kupane is survived by  his wife Sophie, Molefi, daughter-in-law Bontle and four grandchildren.Sunday Independent