CAPE TOWN - The City says fraud and money laundering accused councillor Nora Grose’s many years of experience qualifies her for a position on the municipal public accounts committee.Grose was elected to the committee during a council meeting on Thursday.Grose and Reuben Swartz appeared in the Bellville Commercial Crimes Court in November on charges of fraud and money laundering relating to allegations of misappropriating City funds intended for food relief.They have both been released on R10 000 bail.The Good party has called for Grose to be removed from the position, saying she does not meet the criteria for membership as per the terms of reference adopted.However, the council’s speaker, Felicity Purchase, said Grose’s many years of experience qualified her for the position.“All councillors are allocated to the various portfolio committees. Councillor Nora Grose is no different. “The duties of all councillors in each committee are in terms of the terms of reference of that specific committee. “Her many years of experience, as is the case with other members of the committee in council, qualify her for that position.“Councillor Grose has not been found guilty of any charges to date,“ she said.Good’s Suzette Little said Grose was not an appropriate appointment because the committee investigated fraud, corruption, maladministration and irregular expenditure.“The terms of reference require all members to have integrity and honesty. While Grose is innocent until proven guilty, she is being prosecuted for fraud and money laundering, so she doesn’t meet the standard of integrity or independence required.“She’s being prosecuted for the very conduct (the committee) investigates. She shouldn’t be anywhere near that committee. It’s a conflict of interest and a breach of the requirements to serve on the committee. If she is found not guilty, the DA can reconsider.”The ANC’s head of communications, Sifiso Mtsweni, said they were not “surprised” by the appointment.“It’s not surprising at all. This is the hallmark of the DA – they are a bunch of hypocrites. They harbour within their ranks people who forge qualifications, people who are alleged rapists and sex offenders, (and) fraudsters such as Grose get promoted at will. “The propaganda of DA clean and good governance is now exposed for all to see. It now simply lacks the moral and ethical standing in society,” Mtsweni said. The DA referred questions to the City.While Grose referred questions to Purchase yesterday, she had previously said she would not be found guilty in the court of public opinion.“No member of the party can be suspended until found guilty. I have not gone on trial and am presumed innocent until found guilty. If and when that happens, I will resign as a councillor and step down from politics,” she said.Cape Times