Durban: The family of Logasan Eddie Gounden wants closure after he was shot dead in Malagazi Township near Isipingo on Friday night.Gounden, 40, a driver, sustained gunshot wounds to the head. He died at the scene.Felicia Govender, his sister, said moments before the shooting near his home in Malagazi Township, their mother Priscilla saw him walking on the roadside."Our mother lives near Eddie's home. She asked him where he was going, and he told her to buy bread. Soon after she returned indoors, she heard multiple gunshots. At the time, she did not realise that Eddie had been shot," said Govender.She said a neighbour told her dad Ashok about the shooting."My dad did not say anything to my mother. He, instead, went to the scene and found my brother with two gunshot wounds. Before he could tell my mother, another neighbour told her that Eddie had died."Govender, who lives in Illovo, said she went to the crime scene."Members of the community did not allow me to see his body. I only saw his hands."She said her sibling was kind-hearted and well-respected."He did not have enemies. I don't understand who would want to hurt him or why. We will only find peace once we know why he was killed.""My brother was single. He was six years older than me. From the time I was little, I could always count on him. I last saw him on Christmas Day. He spent time with my daughter and me. Eddie really loved being an uncle. While we did not see each other often, I phoned my mother every day to find out how he was."Since my brother's death, our dad is emotional. He does not talk or eat much, and my mother seems to be slipping into a depression."Gounden's funeral is being planned for later this week.Family and friends posted tributes to him on Facebook.Tony Moodley: RIP Eddie. Will miss your kind-heartedness and helpful nature. Will miss you my brother. Condolences to the family."Ronicka Moodley: "... I'm shocked at this as I saw Eddie one of the days. He was kind-hearted and had a lot of respect.Lieutenant Colonel Nqobile Gwala, a provincial police spokesperson, said police were investigating a case of murder, and no arrests have been made. The motive for the attack, she said, was unknown.The Post