The article “Clarity sought on the City of Cape Town’s prepaid electricity metering software” refers.It is important to note that the current pre-paid electricity metering software will expire in 2024 for all prepaid electricity meters in South Africa.The City has in excess of 570 000 prepaid meters to upgrade and is therefore starting the process early so that all meters are updated before 2024.The benefit to residents is also clear. Pre-paid meters must be updated before 2024, if not; customers will not be able to recharge their meters with new tokens.This is the first update in the history of prepaid meters and is scheduled to be done every 31.9 years. MORE ON THISClarity sought on the City of Cape Town’s prepaid electricity metering softwareUpdates to the software of City prepaid electricity meters is taking place in a phased approach across the metro to ensure all City meters are updated ahead of the 2024 deadline. Only when an area is reached for updating, as per the City schedule, will City customers get the update codes with their normal purchase. Customers may follow a few easy steps to enter the update codes when their area is scheduled for the update. Those who require assistance can contact the City.City customers in an area that has not been reached yet as per the schedule, will not be eligible to update their meter yet.The City is changing the base date in the meter to 2014 and is updating the cryptographic strength of the meter firmware. The update will not include any additional features. Cryptographic strength refers to the security of the encryption and decryption of the token.All City prepaid electricity meters are tested for accuracy at the City’s meter testing laboratory. Test certificates are available on request.The City encourages residents to visit our website for more information about the update, including frequently asked questions (FAQs), as well as to view the project schedule.The City started with the roll-out in November 2021 in the Atlantis, Pella and Mamre areas, and we are currently updating the software of meters in the Milnerton, Table View, Blaauwberg, Parklands and Melkbosstrand areas.Residents may view the project’s schedule on the City’s website: www.capetown.gov.za. The schedule only applies to City supplied residents.* Councillor Beverley van Reenen, Mayoral Committee Member for Energy.** The views expressed here are not necessarily those of Independent Newspapers.Cape ArgusDo you have something on your mind; or want to comment on the big stories of the day? We would love to hear from you. Please send your letters to arglet@inl.co.za.All letters to be considered for publication, must contain full names, addresses and contact details (not for publication).