CAPE TOWN - Former Western Cape DA leader and Transport MEC Bonginkosi Madikizela has lashed back at the criticism over his appointment as Premier Alan Winde’s political advisor, saying he was “more than qualified for the job”. Madikizela resigned as the DA’s Western Cape leader and MEC in April last year following claims that he had lied about his qualifications.This, as former Cape Town mayor Dan Plato was sworn in as Member of the Provincial Legislature on Tuesday, filling the vacancy left by Madikizela.Winde’s spokesperson, Cayla Murray said he was currently awaiting feedback from the National Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA) on the appointment of Madikizela, after which it would be possible to officially appoint him. Murray added: “Given the specific advisory capacity required by the Premier, including assisting with engagement with local communities, and important priorities such as ensuring a functional rail system, the Premier believes that Mr Madikizela has the experience and the expertise required for this specific role in his office.”DPSA said the matter was still receiving attention Tuesday.Madikizela’s appointment follows the retirement of Donald Grant in November 2021. When asked about what qualifies him for the job, Madikizela said he was more than qualified to be a political advisor: “I’ve been a member of Cabinet for 12 years. I’ve been elected twice as the Provincial Leader of my party.  I’m more than qualified as a political advisor.”On questions regarding his statements that there were “double standards” in the way in which the DA had dealt with this qualification scandal, Madikizela said he will not revisit the past.“I’m leaving behind what happened in 2021,” he said. The Good party's Brett Herron slammed the appointment as a “disgraceful example of jobs-for-pals”. “The role of advising the Premier has no purpose other than to pay a handsome salary to a DA cadre. “The Premier has an MEC for Housing and an MEC for Transport – it is their mandate to advise him on housing and transport matters.“Winde owes citizens, who will ultimately pay Madikizela’s proposed salary, an explanation,“ said Herron. ANC leader of the opposition, Cameron Dugmore called on the  National Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA)  not to ratify Winde’s “cynical attempt” to restore Madikizela to public office.“The Premier has shown his contempt for ethical values and once again illustrated how the DA exercises double standards. They have one set of rules for others and another one for themselves. We will not keep quiet and allow them to continue being hypocrites,” he said. Ricardo Mackenzie, DA spokesperson in the legislature, said: “The appointment of special advisors is at the discretion of the Premier and as an audit of the cabinet was conducted by the Premier’s Office, please contact his office for further information.”Cape Times