If you drive just west of Mogale City on the West Rand, you will come to a place called Tarlton. It is farmland, the home of mealie meal that feeds the area, if not the entire country.It is the home of the bakkie and the tractor, and the farmer is lord of the manor. The farmworker, as always, ranks far lower down the social ladder.The homes of the farmhands are, at best, mud hovels. Rent is not a term in their vocabulary. They work the land to earn tenure.But for reasons best known to some bureaucrats, this is where some bright spark decided to build RDP houses, way back in 2018. The houses are standing empty to now, all hundreds of them in various stages of incompleteness – and now in disrepair.As if this was not bad enough, there was town house type housing that came along with the project that a local resident says “they were intended for the well-off, who can afford rent”.For the ordinary man – and woman – without means and invariably indigent, there are the RDP houses, hundreds of them.The houses were built in 2018.A young man laments that the houses have been standing empty for too long.Minister Tselapedi (not his real name) says they applied at Human Settlements when they came to the local community hall “two years back”.“Our frustration is edging us closer to moving into the houses.” Under ward 26 of Mogale City Local Municipality “that does nothing for us”.The local councillor is an old man known as Whitey who stays “somewhere in town”. The last time they saw Whitey was around the local government elections.The area they live in, next to where the new RDP development was supposed to take shape, is known as Kwa-Norman, Norman’s place. It used to be a brick factory in its heyday. When Norman left, his workers stayed behind and raised generations of their families.The likes of Tselapedi are third-generation residents of Kwa-Norman.All that the residents have to their names are ANC issue T-shirts. Here grown men who should be doing something (economically) are doing nothing. Children bear children.At least there’s a community hall, and a crèche next to it. But the young mothers, who are themselves children, clearly do not have the financial muscle to enrol their kids at the crèche.New Mogale City mayor Tyrone Gray says: “I am aware of both the unfinished and near-complete sections. We have been bringing this matter to the media since 2019/2020/2021.”He adds: “The investigation has been triggered. I will await the outcome of the report. The issue isn't the funds but administrative concerns that have been raised relating to allocations and appointments.“The project must be completed and come back online,” the executive mayor says, “with constant and close monitoring.”He says the amount spent on the eyesore will be furnished in the report. “We will update you accordingly, with an exact figure.”Gray says completing the project is crucial: “Not just this term, but within this year. The project must be fast-tracked. Sustainable housing is a priority to address developmental backlogs and improve lives.”Taking it to council cannot be avoided: “It is not the normal process but an internal investigation has raised concerns which council needs to be made aware of. This is in terms of transparency and accountability.”The Gauteng Department of Human Settlements was not available for comment.Sunday Independent