DURBAN - The Kloof and Highway SPCA rescued six dogs which were kept in a makeshift kennel in the remote area of KwaNyuswa in KwaZulu-Natal.The SPCA said inspector Petra Abrams and field officer Eric Simamane had received a call about the dogs that were kept in a makeshift shelter under unhygienic conditions.The complainant said the dogs were hardly ever seen outside the enclosed areas.Abrams and Simamane then went to the scene.“The dogs were in cages that were built from scrap metal, leftover fencing and broken pieces of wood. The damp ground was covered in faeces and urine. The broken containers that were serving the purpose as water bowls were filled with a dirty liquid and no food was visible,” the SPCA said.MORE ON THISWATCH: SPCA field officer saves goat from drowning in deep muddy man-made ravineMore than 1 000 animals admitted at the Kloof and Highway SPCA in DecemberDog run over on the M19 finds a new home after recoveringReleased after 4-hour walk: The chicken-eating African rock python rescued in MolweniPICS: Kloof and Highway SPCA inspector rescues 3.4m, 19.48kg chicken-eating African rock pythonIt said the dogs wagged their tails despite the terrible conditions they were in. Two of the dogs had skin conditions and one dog in particular was very aggressive.“The owner was not present and did not answer his phone when phoned, a warning was issued. The owner had 24 hours to respond to the warning, which he failed to do,” the SPCA said.   “Inspector Abrams had no choice but to apply for a warrant from the Magistrate, six dogs were confiscated as per the warrant into the care of The Kloof and Highway SPCA.”The organisation said when the owner of the dogs contacted the SPCA, it became apparent that he was willing to learn.Abrams met with the owner and explained exactly what was wrong with the environment in which the six dogs were being kept. He was educated as to the requirements that were needed, the conditions that would be acceptable, the correct feeding and treatment of his dogs.“ He was educated and shown the kennels at our SPCA in order to gain some insight into what is required for an animal to be healthy, happy and safe. If the enclosure is not good enough for a human to stay in then it is not good enough for an animal. Not only was the owner extremely remorseful, but he requested to be given the opportunity to prove that he had learnt from his warning,” the SPCA said.The SPCA said the dogs were kept in their kennels for safe keeping, giving the owner time to construct a new enclosure that met the correct standards. The dogs also received health checks with the vets and the correct medications given.The organisation had a discussion with the owner that the dogs were going to be his financial responsibility going forward.“He (owner) agreed to surrender two dogs into the care of our SPCA so that he could ensure that his four dogs received the best care and quality of life he could afford. All four received deworming, inoculations and where necessary, skin treatment. The owner made sure that he paid for all the treatment that his dogs received and was grateful for the help that he received,” the SPCA said.For weeks, Abrams followed up with the owner and conducted unannounced visits to assess the progress of the enclosures.“We were so happy that this owner had taken all the advice and all the information we had given him and the new kennel for his dogs was an amazing transition from a deplorable site to an enclosure that will ensure his four dogs are living in safe, hygienic conditions. All the beds and blankets are elevated off the floor, they have clean bowls for their food and water, and the floor is cleaned daily. Whenever the owner is at home during the day, he allows his dogs out to spend time with him on his property. The owner assured us that he wanted to be an example to his community, and wanted to educate children and adults on how to take care of their animals,” the SPCA said.“This gentleman was not intentionally cruel, he was not malicious, he just needed to be educated and shown the correct way to take care of his animals.”Daily News