DIRKS SUSPENDED FOR ASKING RAMAPHOSA TO ACCOUNTPeople like Dirks forget what deployment means, if you want to do things outside the mandate of the party then simply open your own party instead of wanting to be a hero at the expense of the very same party that made and deployed you, it is simple. TSHOLOFELO MOKOENAI am in agreement with holding the president to account. That is good democratic practice, something that was completely foreign during the Zuma tenure, Mervyn's reasons were not a genuine oversight endeavour, he was intending to play factional nonsense. Scopa must be allowed to function. ELVIS TEMBAThe hypocrisy of Mervyn Dirks in pretending to be shocked by Ramaphosa vowing to protect ANC comrades who used state resources for party purposes, is staggering! This is exactly what Zuma was doing the whole time. Suddenly he is concerned about the boundary between party and state? They will do to him what they did to Makhosi Khoza, and they have started. FARIEDA KHANSouth Africa is probably a country with the number one hypocritical citizens on earth. The people who were clapping for Makhosi Khoza for standing for her oath, are the same people who are now attacking Mervyn Dirks for doing the same as Khoza. SIZWE MSIMANGAFormer Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng was scathing on Parliament for its failure to hold the executive accountable in the Nkandla judgment. Is the suspension of Mervyn Dirks by the ANC caucus in Parliament not an attempt to muzzle accountability by the executive? WONDERBOY PETERSODDS AND ENDSResponding to the article regarding the exco ignoring the deputy mayor. Mr Mavundla cast the deciding vote so the ANC got eThekwini  Municipality, he is an exemplary leader helping his constituents and doing the work he has been designated to do. He is going to end up with a bullet. It just shows again, people want the job, the pay but not to work. I am even more concerned now. ANONHas anyone tried to lodge an electricity fault? Essential services in South Africa are non-existent. I spent more than an hour trying to report an electricity pole which was knocked down and resulted in a power outage. Eskom's response was that it is not their problem, it is eThekwini Municipality's. Even the woman at the emergency service line said that as the accident was over it is not Metro Police’s problem, even though I explained that there was a live wire dangling. NM, WESTVILLEWithout gated estates and townhouse complexes, the municipality will be bankrupt. A gated estate with 500 homes, each paying rates of average R4000 per month (not including electricity and water) amounts to R2 Million per month, for absolutely no services offered by the municipality. The levies that each homeowner pays monthly to the Homeowners Association between R1800 to R2000 covers all services within the estates.The municipality makes a net profit of R24 Million from this estate for no services at all.There are over 500 such estates, some very large in the Durban and surrounding areas operating this way. Hundreds of millions are donated each year to this municipality, what exactly are they doing with this money? They need to give the public an answer. NARESH SINGHSouth Africa continues to ignore appeals from the United Nations and World Health Organisation to lower speed limits and not to dismiss road carnage (mainly the result of crimes such as speeding and drunk driving) as "accidents". Government's failure to follow UN and WHO guidelines on road safety costs 40 lives and over 100 injuries every day on our roads, roughly equivalent to a Sharpeville massacre or a jet plane crash every day. How much longer are we going to tolerate this scandal? RICHARD BENSONDaily News