Former drug mule Jennifer Mkhombo has started on the path of not  only helping herself, but other ex-convicts as well. Picture supplied.When Jennifer Mkhombo ended up in jail at the age of 25 after being convicted of drug trafficking, she watched her whole world crumble before her eyes.“It felt like a dream. I was just waiting for someone to come and vindicate me and tell them that I had been good all my life,” she said, describing the thoughts that ran through her head on the day in 2010 when she was arrested at OR Tambo International Airport after drugs were discovered in a jacket she was wearing.Mkhombo had just stepped off a flight back to South Africa from Brazil.“I was sure it was a mistake because while in Brazil, I was told the deal had been postponed. It was all a mistake in my eyes,” said Mkhombo, who is now 37.At the time, Mkhombo was dating a Nigerian man, who had openly admitted to dealing in drugs, while saying he was trying to make ends meet. Mkhombo claims she never set her eyes on any drugs, but she knew an operation was in full swing.At the time, Mkhombo had come out of an abusive relationship. Her life up to that point, she said, was unkind, full of poverty, lack and abuse.Originally from Bushbuckridge, Mkhombo said she moved to Pretoria while fleeing from her then nine-year-old son’s father.“I fell for him (the Nigerian boyfriend) because of how he made me feel. He made me feel beautiful during a time when dark-skinned girls were not viewed as pretty, and over time we both built trust between the two of us.“He trusted me enough to open up about his dealings and I trusted him enough to offer myself to travel to Brazil, replacing the original girl who was scheduled to go,” she said.In Brazil, Mkhombo stayed for 17 days with a "contact" in Brazil. The stay was not the best – she described it as a prison – because the contact, a man, kept demanding sex. Each time she refused, she would be punished by being made to sleep on the floor during a cold winter. She was also not allowed to step outside the house for the duration of her stay.“Towards the last days of my stay, the guy told me that the deal would be postponed because the weather wasn’t conducive for him to prepare whatever it was that he was supposed to prepare. That meant I wouldn’t have to transport drugs back to South Africa, and I was relieved to hear that and looked forward to heading home.“Before going home, I asked to be taken to the local shops to buy things that I could resell in South Africa. I remember spotting this really beautiful, warm jacket that I wanted, but the guy refused, saying we will return for it.“The day before my departure, he returned with another jacket as a gift for me. I obviously objected that it wasn’t the one that I wanted, but he simply said the other one was out of stock. Little did I know that one was stuffed with drugs, carefully sewn onto the inside part of the jacket,” she recalled.At the OR Tambo International Airport, she was confronted by two police officers, who claimed to have been "waiting for her", and asked that she follow them. She was thoroughly searched and although at first they seemed to have not found anything, one officer insisted they scan the jacket. That was when a dark orange substance was discovered inside her jacket.“He asked that they scan his jacket as well to see the difference. When they dusted the jacket, they found pure cocaine,” she said, adding that the police would have been tipped off.Mkhombo was sentenced to 10 years in prison, but only served five-and-a-half years – at the Female Centre of the Johannesburg Prison, and at the Kgosi Mampuru Prison in Pretoria.“Those were the worst days of my life. Just thinking about prison still brings tears to my eyes, how one blind mistake can bring so much pain to someone is a surreal experience.”Mkhondo was committed to rebuilding her life after her release. She applied for various jobs and even joined forces with some individuals to establish business corporations, but none of those took off.“The world is not open to giving an ex-convict a second chance, and although we are encouraged to tell the truth about ourselves, even in job interviews, you are immediately excluded from opportunities. Life was difficult,” she said.Her saving grace came in the form of a training opportunity with the Chemical Industries Education & Training Authority (CHIETA), in partnership with the University of Johannesburg – where she was taught the skills to produce her own cleaning and other products, such as dishwashing liquid, engine cleaners and even perfumes.That opportunity gave rise to her company, Bonita Express, bonita meaning pretty in Spanish.“My [company’s aim] is twofold: It is to empower women who are somehow excluded, for whatever reason; and, it is to give ex-convicts a chance at earning a living like everyone else.”The business, which is still in its infancy is grappling with funding before it can employ people.“I work with my mother for now. I really can’t wait to give people a chance at a new life through Bonita Express. I know how one opportunity can help change one’s life course. I hope my life story is enough to inspire change for others too,” she said.Mkhombo manufactures her products in Tembisa and wishes to make enough money to fulfil her dream of not only being independent, but also lend a helping hand to those who need it.Sunday Independent