CAPE TOWN - The distraught mother of 17-year-old Brenteano Brink, one of four fishermen who remains missing after their boat capsized at sea almost two years ago, cries herself to sleep at night to this day, longing for her son to return home.The families of the missing men say they still have no idea what caused the boat, carrying 13 on board to capsize between Oudekraal and Mouille Point.The incident sparked one of the biggest local search operations in recent times.On February 27, 2020, the National Sea Rescue Institute (NSRI) Bakoven duty crew were activated to the incident after one person came ashore at Clifton and raised the alarm.He led the operation to an additional three men who had come ashore.During an extensive search two more men were located by the Air Force helicopter floating in the water, three quarters a nautical mile off-shore of Bakoven.The NSRI said a search continued for days for the six men missing at sea.Two more bodies were found later.The bodies of Brink Ganief Rasdien, Maurice Adams, and Edwin Siegelaar have never been recovered.Speaking to the Cape Times this week, Brenteano’s mother Mary-Anne Brink said she remembered the week with him before the incident.“On Wednesday night, he had gone to church, that was the first night Brenteano actually played and laughed with his sister.“On Thursday, I went to work. One of my work colleagues went to the shops, when she returned she asked where’s Brenteano, I said he was sleeping at home.“She said I must check because there were people who went missing on a boat.“I then phoned my dad and asked him to go look for him where he was sleeping, and if he had awoke. My dad came back, he said he was no longer there. He said my son was on the boat,” Brink said.“I don’t know what happened on that boat, but what I know is my son is gone. After two years we found out that a Camps Bay detective got the case, but none of them came to us, none of them came to talk to us. We just want to know what happened on the boat.“We say to them, why not question the survivors that were on the boat who can tell us what happened that night, they say they can’t do it, that was their response.“We just want closure, that’s all we want, that’s all we are asking for,” she said.Wife of missing Ganief Rasdien, Camila Rasdien said her daughter is always asking her questions about her father.“Now what do I tell her, when I also don’t know what happened.“I have no information. Nobody talks to us. Nobody told us what happened or gave us any update.“The last time I spoke to my husband it was on the phone, the day he went missing at sea, I was worried - he said ’It’s alright, it’s alright - we all alright’. That was the last thing he said.“Now that he’s gone, I am alone, I have no one - he was the breadwinner of the family.“My husband was never a poacher, he was a family man who went fishing because he wanted to provide for his family,” she said.Xenolene Bazier from Hermanus said the body of her brother Xenophon who was also on the boat was found, however her nephew, Edwin Siegelaar is still missing at sea.“They were together on the boat. My brother was found two weeks after the incident,  but never my nephew. We have not heard anything about my nephew, they just said they are not searching any further.“When my brother was found there was nothing left to see that it was him, they had to take my mother’s DNA,” Bazier.NSRI spokesperson Craig Lambinon said the search for the fishermen was arguably one of the biggest search operations the unit has conducted in recent times.“We stayed in contact with the family for a long time after this incident. Considering where the incident had happened, it was a massive search area.“In fact, there was every likelihood that if anything had eventually washed ashore it may have been as far up the West coast as Yzerfontein or even Langebaan.“For quite a while after that, even the likes of NSRI Yzerfontein and NSRI Mykonos were tasked to keep a look out. A case like this is never closed, it remains an open case.“Obviously the case is in the care of the police when it becomes a search and recovery operation. But we all know, even though it’s in their hands, all services involved always keep a lookout. We owe that to the families,” he said.Hout Bay ward councillor Roberto Quintas said: “It is with a sense of sadness for the lives lost at sea, and the families and friends left behind, that we think of these men and others who have met similar fates. The NSRI goes over and beyond as a volunteer rescue organisation to save lives out at sea, however the great risk posed by the ocean can never be predicted nor expected”.Police said they respond to questions in due course.Cape Times