In some cases entire homes where washed away like in the case of Nelly Msize who is now collecting what is left over her home for the last 7 years. Picture Timothy BernardKlass Aphane says by the time he woke the water was already knee high. His childrens school textbooks are all waterloged. Picture Timothy BernardMANYANE MANYANEResidents at the Eateer Fabrieke informal settlement in Mamelodi, Tshwane are demanding to be relocated to another area following heavy rains that flooded their corrugated iron shacks and damaged their furniture and other belongings .The residents said the storm happened yesterday (Saturday) in the wee hours of the morning, when the shacks built next to Moritile River were flooded .The flood damage was so bad that some of the shacks collapsed while some residents were still busy cleaning their homes in the afternoon.Government officials visited the area to assess the damage and to convince the residents to move to the safety of community halls. Their attempts were met with resistance from the community, with residents refusing to take up the offer and saying they were fed up with the empty promises of officials.Buses that were organised to take residents to the halls left empty because the residents refused to budge.Kenny Mohale said the flooding had been happening since 2016 and the community has been moved to community halls on several occasions."The government promised to relocate us to another area. But this has not happened. What we want is to be relocated, not to sleep in the halls”, he said.The 59-year-old said they would rather sleep in the tents than at the hall."These people must know that we want to be relocated. They will take us to the halls for a few days and what happens after all?" he asked.Another flood victim, Mohashoa Maritje, said the government hds been promising to relocate them for more than two years now."These politicians only come here when they want votes from us. Even the other political parties will come and promise to change our lives, but nothing ever happens”.Community leader Vusi Sibisi said the residents were angry with being temporarily housed in halls and want to know what happens after that."They are telling us to go to the halls and they will provide food and blankets. But they don't want to commit themselves to relocate us after that”.In Willow Fam informal settlement, which was also flooded, Klaas Aphane said he had to wake at around 2am because of the rain."We stood on the street for more than an hour," said the 49-year-old."I don't know where I am going to sleep tonight. Some people were moved to the hall. I have to sleep here to look after my belongings. It is a tough situation, he said.Another resident Thomas Rankou said: "It's tough here, especially in summer because we have to sleep with our shoes and clothes on. I have two kids and my neighbour helped me to save them. I am very frustrated.Ward councillor Nomvula Sielane admitted that the residents have lost faith in the municipality and don’t believe anything that comes from “us”."But my plea is for them to go to the hall to be safe because there's an 80% chance of rain over the weekend”.City of Johannesburg emergency spokesperson Nana Radebe-Kgiba said although they have had no major incidents, they were monitoring the river levels in areas such as Diepsloot and Alexandra."We also checked in Douglasdale and Soweto and we did not have any major incidents. Our aquatic unit is radically going around checking the river levels and at the moment we are not worried because it is not raining continuously."Sunday Independent