CAPE TOWN - Nyanga grandmother Nombuso Rubushe, 63, has detailed the pain of having to wake up early in one of the country’s most dangerous townships to queue for hours on end, only to be turned away at Masincedane clinic.She had gone for a normal check up on Monday when she could not get the help she needed for a disease she was diagnosed with six year ago.The clinic has come under the spotlight from residents who accused nurses of providing poor services, with no action taken against them.Going and coming from the clinic during the morning and afternoon is always a life gamble because anything could happen and it becomes worse for her health when not being assisted, said Rubushe.“Sick people are made to stand in the queue for a long time and bear in mind that while we are in the queue, there are no chairs to sit on. We have to stand or sit on the floor while waiting to be assisted and the treatment from the staff is not pleasing at all.“This happened to me a few weeks ago and also recently during the week when I went to the clinic for a check-up. I was an hour early but I was told that they are about to close. I did not understand because I arrived early, people have been complaining about poor services at the clinic. The clinic used to excel when it comes to services but I don’t know what happened. Poor service at the clinic started last year when new staff members started working. They just do not care. Maybe it’s because they are young or they are not well-trained,” said Rubushe.Another patient, who asked not to be named fearing being victimised, said she was also turned away on Monday when she was seeking assistance. Instead, she was assisted on Wednesday morning after almost three hours of waiting.“The City should take note of poor services at their clinics. They are aware of this but they choose to ignore it. By the way, it is not only this clinic that has poor services including other clinics in other areas,” she said.Masincedane clinic management told the Cape Times the matter was raised by the City and they have since answered the questions. They referred us to the City for answers.Community Service and Health mayco member Patricia van der Ross said she was not aware of any City clinic closing before the actual closing time unless there was a specific reason.“For example unrest or other emergencies. If any such incident occurs the City will investigate.  It could affect services subject to the time of closure as per the reasons above. Clinics open at 7.30am and close at 4.30pm. The City’s Health Department confirms no closure of clinics has been confirmed,” said Van der Ross.Cape Times