DURBAN - After a week of reports of pupils experiencing ancestral callings while in school, a teacher asked colleagues how they dealt with pupils that said they were undergoing an ancestral journey. Some pupils burn incense and snuff in school bathrooms and while others even ask school management if they can attend school in their regalia.This comes after IOL reported that at least three KwaZulu-Natal schools reported incidents of ancestral callings. The latest incident was at PR Pather School on Friday, where it was reported that pupils appeared to be displaying movements resembling a seizure. In Reservoir Hills on Thursday, pupils at Dr AD Lazarus Secondary School were dismissed after several pupils began experiencing ancestral callings. In Pietermaritzburg, pupils at Dunveria Secondary also experienced callings. According to reports, children were vomiting, and some fainted. The school's management said a cleansing would be undertaken at the school.The question was posed on Facebook, and colleagues responded with their experiences and suggestions.This is what teachers with such pupils in their class had to say:MORE ON THISWhat are ancestral callings and how do schools deal with them?Pupils at AD Lazarus School in Durban displaying ’ancestral calling’ disrupt learningTwo Cape schools rocked by homophobia, K-word and cultural insensitivity“I have a pupil in my class who always moans and does the telling. He gets uncontrollable, and it is hard for other pupils. We are behind with the syllabus with that class. The boy always tells lies, roars like a lion and crawls under tables,” she said.Another said she had a few grade 10 pupils who had the same issues last year. They would start crying in class, claiming that they were seeing things. They would cause so much commotion until a time when she was very annoyed because she could hardly do her job.She stood up and said: “This is my classroom, and I am here to teach, you are here to learn. This has to stop now. What you are doing is a violation of the rights of other learners. They are here to learn, and you are busy disturbing the learning process. I am done. If you want to attend to your madlozi, don't come to my class. I'll just send demerits to your parents.”“Guess what? It stopped,” she said.Some teachers are divided on the issue:One teacher said: “So their ancestors are in the school toilets these days!!!! Kanti, is this not supposed to be done home in a rightful place geez?”Another teacher said that the South African Schools Act made it clear that no rituals or initiation of any nature may be performed in the school.“With regards to the sangoma initiation regalia, the school code of conduct for pupils will have to be consulted. If it is permissive to do so, there is no problem then.”“Rules mustn't be undermined but be applicable to everyone without any unfair discrimination,” he said.One said if it was allowed then prayer should be allowed in schools.Another said regalia should be allowed, but the parents should just write a letter asking to deviate from the uniform. Incense should be burnt after school hours.“Remember though before you state that no pupil should be forced into any religious practices at school and, if your school follows a Christian ethos, pupils who wish to be excused from the religious section of the assemblies should be allowed to do so.”Daily News