DURBAN - RELATIVES of a family of four, who were brutally murdered last week in Imbali township in Pietermaritzburg, say they do not know why they were killed.It is alleged that the Hlela family were asleep in their home last Thursday night when the suspects kicked the door open and opened fire on them.Bheki Hlela, 53, a pastor at a local church, Ntombi, 42, Siphokazi, 15, and Siwinile Nzimande, 24, were all murdered. An 8-year-old survived the shootings. In another incident, a fifth family member committed suicide after hearing about the murders.Family members, who spoke to The Mercury yesterday, asked not to be named as they feared for their safety.One family member said they wanted the killers to be found.MORE ON THISUnions send condolences following nurse’s murder at Tembisa HospitalCele speaks out over KZN mass murders and pledges to nab killers ‘come hell or high water’Grade 12 pupil among 6 slain in Inanda, his younger brother was the first to find his body at the scene“We are left alone as the kids in this family and our elders are gone. We would like to receive any kind of help because the elders were the breadwinners. After the funeral we won’t know what to do and where to go,” said the family member.Another family member said she got a call to inform her about the gunshots being fired at her home. She said the child who survived informed them that Bheki Hlela had been shot.“We called the police and when they arrived they asked how many people were living at home. We explained how many they were.“The police allowed us to see them and they told us that they were no more.“We do not know why this happened. This is hard for us as a family, we feel like we are living in another world,” said the family member.Ward councillor Mabhungu Mkhize said Bheki Hlela had been a leader in the community.He said the pastor cared and worked for the community.“We are all living in fear in this community. However, we are hoping that by involving all the relevant stakeholders to help the community things will be better. The police are not patrolling this area regularly,” he said.He said after the funeral they will meet with the community to discuss ways to deal with crime and involve the SAPS so that residents can feel safe again.Mayor of uMgungundlovu District Municipality, Mzi Zuma, described the murders as a tragedy. “We want the community to unite and fight against crime. As much as this is the police’s job they cannot do it without the help of the community,” he said.Zuma urged the community to give the police any information that they think might help to find the killers.Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza, who visited the family yesterday to express her condolences, said the killers deserved to rot in jail for what they did.“If the killers are not caught and arrested these family members and the community will continue to feel unsafe. However, we are going to make sure that the killers or killer and the mastermind are behind bars. What will make us happy is for them to get harsh sentences which will send a strong message to others,” she said.Police spokesperson Brigadier Jay Naicker said charges of murder were being investigated by Plessislaer SAPS. “We are appealing to anyone who might have information that can assist police in nailing the suspects to contact Crime Stop on 08600 10111.”He said they can also report information via the MySAPS app.THE MERCURY MEC for Social Development in KwaZulu Natal  Nonhlanhla Khoza, along with Mzi Zuma Mgungundlovu district municipality mayor and ward 41 councillor, Mabhungu Mkhize, visited Hlela family members after four of their relatives were shot dead. Those who died were Bheki Hlela , Ntombifuthi Hlela , Siphokazi Hlela and Siwinile Nzimande. The incident happened at Mbali 14 outside Pietermaritzburg last week Friday.Bongani Mbatha: African News Agency /ANA