Ann Malinga, the widow of Robbie Malinga, sits in front of the late musician’s image. Pictures supplied.IF MEMORY is a weapon, then the family of late muso Robbie Malinga is well-armed because a golf day will be played on Friday, March, 4, 2022, at the Killarney Golf Club, north of Joburg, to keep his legacy alive.Malinga passed away on Christmas Day in 2017 after a battle with cancer. He was 49.Apart from his vast catalogue of music that began with the song Insimbi in 2002, a song that also became his stage name, Malinga would endear himself to the hearts of throngs of fans, especially with his collaborations with other musicians.Among those he has done duets with are Zahara, Musa Sukwene and Kelly Khumalo, to name but three. From his debut producing os a hit for Sfiso called My Love Song, he went on to do the same for many other artists, earning the moniker “Quincy Jones of South Africa”.A four-ball for the golf day is R6 500.“The proceeds from the golf day will go to the Boy Child Care Project, schools shoes and uniforms to under-privileged schools in the remote areas, developing upcoming music talent and providing them with the necessary support to advance their talent,” said Joel Sekwala of the organisers, Epitome of Black Excellence (EBE).Sekwala was speaking at a media launch at the Killarney Golf Club on Tuesday where the golf shirt and cap to be worn on the day of the inaugural event were unveiled.Asked if the golf day will assist in keeping the memory of her late husband alive, his widow Ann said: “For me it will. It is one of the events that were in line with the brand Robbie, though it is not music. “It is an event that will bring people from all works of live together. It brings different industries together. Corporates, politicians, entertainment, all of them with be coming to celebrate Robbie. It has a deep meaning for me. “With the amount of people who are going to be there and have agreed to come on board and partner with us, it means a lot to me.”Sekwala said his company partnered with the Robbie Malinga Legacy Group because, in his life, the late musician shared his talent and gifts with others.The widow released a book last November, simply titled Robbie Malinga, which she said was her way of “preserving his memory the best way she knows how because music is not her field of expertise”.The Malingas were married for over 20 years and have two children, Robbie Jnr and Zanokuhle.The 123-page book that Ann wrote is a commendable effort at keeping the memory of a departed spouse alive. It was edited by entertainment journalist Lesley Mofokeng.If the golf day follows in the same vein and comes close to the quality of the book, Insimbi will sleep easy.Sunday Independent