DURBAN resident Pavithri Jaggernath is driving around in a VW Polo Vivo she won in the Pedros Chicken Viva Vivo prize draw held at the Pedros head office in Newlands East, Durban.Pavithri was one of three finalists. Over 100 staff members, suppliers, partners and guests eagerly waited to see which of the finalists, Naadhira Yusuf and Jaggernath from Durban and Zamazulu Makaula from Johannesburg, would drive away in a new car worth R220 000.The event, held recently, was hosted by local comedienne, Nonto R and was the culmination of a three-month national campaign which ran over the festive season and was Pedros’ biggest give-away to date.Pavithri Jaggernath won a VW Polo Vivo in the Pedros chicken  Viva Vivo Prize Draw held in Durban. Picture supplied. The ladies were randomly selected from the pool of over 38000 entrants from around the country. They waited with nervous anticipation as they each randomly chose a large, helium-filled balloon and then popped it to receive their key.Of course, only one key would unlock the car and, as it turned out, that key belonged to Jaggernath.The runner-ups did not go home empty handed as they each received a Pedros Hamper complete with vouchers and other goodies.Pavithri Jaggernath, Clinton Govender, and their son, Orion.  Jaggernath won a VW Polo Vivo in the Pedros chicken  Viva Vivo Prize Draw held in Durban. Picture supplied. The campaign, Pedros’ biggest to date, was a success, especially across its social media platforms which enjoyed significant gains and reported millions of engagements.As the fastest-growing chicken franchise in South Africa, Pedros has firmly established itself as a national brand with over 70 amazing stores countrywide and many more in the pipeline. Their secret?A firm commitment to delivering a quality product, driving an excellent service experience and offering unbeatable value for money.Pavithri Jaggernath won a VW Polo Vivo in the Pedros Chicken  Viva Vivo Prize Draw held in Durban. Picture supplied. As a result, Pedros has not only disrupted the quick service market with their strong, consistent product and competitive pricing, but has quickly become one of the leading flame-grilled chicken brands in SA.While they believe that “local is lekker”, sourcing and producing all of their products in conjunction with SA partners, their vision, inspiration and strategy is global.Last year they opened their first store outside of SA, Pedros Airport Junction in Botswana.They have ambitious plans to expand their international footprint.Daily News