CAPE TOWN - The DA, a firm critic of the ANC’s cadre deployment, has refused to comment on the appointment of disgraced former public works and transport MEC Bonginkosi Madikizela as a special adviser to Premier Alan Winde, citing the separation of power between party and state.Opposition parties have accused Winde of being in blatant contravention of public service guidelines following his application to Public Service and Administration Minister Ayanda Dlodlo to appoint Madikizela as a level 4 special advisor. The remuneration for the position was reportedly about R2 million a year.Madikizela had resigned as an MEC and DA Western Cape leader after it emerged he had lied about having a degree, dashing his hopes of becoming City mayor ahead of last year’s local government election.Almost a year after his resignation in April, Winde’s office now says Madikizela has “an in-depth understanding of the provincial government”. Winde had suspended Madikizela prior to his resignation. Asked to comment on the matter, DA leader John Steenhuisen’s spokesperson Charity McCord said Madikizela’s appointment had nothing to do with the DA or the leader of the DA.The party’s provincial acting leader, Tertius Simmers also distanced the DA from the appointment saying queries should be directed to the provincial government.“The DA is firm on the separation between party and state,” he said.But the DA has been leading the charge against the ANC’s cadre deployment, which the party said was responsible for the ailing of some of the SOEs. It has even has even sponsored a private members bill to end the practise.“Winde makes a mockery of his commitment to clean government and acting without fear or favour against members of government who are guilty of wrongdoing,” said ANC leader in the provincial legislature Cameron Dugmore.He accused Winde of having  “succumbed to a DA Fedex instruction that Madikizela must be employed as a special advisor in his office”.“Madikizela resigned as MEC for Transport and Public Works after DA members opposed to him, and leaked his fraudulent CV to the media. Madikizela claimed fraudulently that he had a BCom. It is worth noting that no action was taken by the DA against white public reps who had done the same. This is DA cadre deployment,” said Dugmore.Good Party secretary-general Brett Herron, said the DA planned to “parachute” Madikizela into the plum position after it was confirmed he would be appointed and remunerated at Level 4.“Madikizela does not meet any of the guideline requirements. He is a professional politician with Winde saying publicly that he has lived without income for the last year. He is not recognized as an expert at a national level and international level nor does he possess ‘high level skills’ or ‘scarce skills’.“This appointment is an abuse of the public purse by Winde and the DA to take care of a friend. The DA is quick to criticise so-called cadre deployment by national government, as it should, and has even sponsored a private members bill to end the practise, yet it doesn’t practice what it preaches,” said Herron.Winde’s spokesperson, Cayla Murray said: “All nine premiers, like national ministers, are empowered to appoint Special Advisors. This is guided by the Public Service Act and associated national policy. These appointments are made directly by the premier or national Minister, and the person is not an official in a government department permanently employed. Their term is governed by contract and linked to the term of office of the Premier or National Minister, given the very specific nature of the position in support of an elected executive.“In this case, Winde has decided to appoint Madikizela, who has extensive experience and expertise to provide the specific support requested directly from the Premier. Madikizela has served the citizens of the Western Cape for many years in critical delivery departments and he has an in-depth understanding of the provincial government. He has the requisite knowledge and expertise, as a former MEC of Human Settlements and Transport and Public Works to provide the support that the Premier has requested,” said Murray.She would not confirm that Madikizela would earn about R2 million per year.“Finally, the salary levels are determined by national government policy, with the national (department) approving the level of appointment. This is the same guidelines given to national ministers, and the salary levels are fully transparent. We await final guidance from the (department) in this regard,” said Murray.The Department of Public Service and Administration did not respond to questions by deadline. Madikizela also did not respond to questions.Deputy vice chancellor at the University of Zululand and political analyst Professor Sipho Seepe said: “To this point there has already been enough expression of assumption but now it is all about what value he can add in this position. The premier is taking him on the level of expertise that he can provide as there are still many lessons that can be derived from Madikizela and they are also valuable lessons. Yes there was a misrepresentation previously but he cannot be punished permanently. We have to get out of that thinking that one should be disgraced for the rest of your life. Just because you erred, there should still be a sense of humanity and he shouldn’t be discarded as he still has lessons to share,” said Seepe.Cape Times