Medical student Ayanda Majola from Alexandra Township, in the north of Joburg. Pic suppliedtshepiso.tshabalala@inl.co.zaFOR many women, having beautiful skin enhances their confidence and can boost their self-esteem. However, while others are born with flawless skin, some women require skincare products to stay flawless after puberty.This means that one must find the right products suitable for their skin type, especially if they have underlying skin conditions. Jumping from one product to another can be a nightmare, and it can be hefty on the pocket too.Medical student, Ayanda Majola, from Alexandra township in Johannesburg, was once among the many women who lived the nightmare of having bad skin.She said the state of one’s skin has a psychological effect on their self-esteem.“We live in a world where acne and skin disorders, in general, are viewed as ’unattractive’, and that makes anyone living with them have a poor self-image. Having healthy skin and being comfortable in it is important because when you feel good about your appearance, your confidence peaks,” she said.The aspiring cosmetic mogul said her personal experience inspired Yanda Cosmetics. Majola said she had difficulty finding skincare products suitable for her sensitive skin.“With both my sister and I suffering from eczema, I decided to put my knowledge of science and the skin to good use. I formulated chemical-free skincare products that are effective and gentle even on eczema-prone skin,” she said.The 21-year-old woman said that growing up in Alexandra, commonly known as Gomora among locals, played a huge role in building her character and making a difference in the community.“Despite what people may think of Alex, my childhood memories are very positive. Growing up in a township will teach you the true principles of ubuntu and helping others. Be it sharing with your neighbours or knowing as a child that every adult is your parent.”The woman believes that helping others has always been her purpose in life, which influenced her to pursue studies in the health sciences field.“My dream is to become a qualified oncologist and be at the forefront of cancer research and finding the cure,” she said proudly.Majola launched her business last year in March when she started selling her experimental lip glosses. She said she had always had a greater vision of building her cosmetics empire when she started but knew she had to start small.As time went by, she put together a whole cosmetic line of different products using the skill and knowledge she acquired in class. Yanda Cosmetics consists of facial serums, toners, soaps and masks.“Our serums are our best-selling products. However, we are working on creating three full-skincare ranges that target the main concerns people face: acne, dry skin, and hyperpigmentation. All products are made for sensitive skin but are also suitable for all skin types,” said the young businesswoman.Majola said what sets her range apart is that her brand uses a combination of science and botanical extracts to create effective products that are satisfying to the consumer’s skin.Combining these two elements enabled Majola to produce products that are suitable even for people struggling with sensitive skin disorders such as eczema, rosacea and psoriasis.She further added that the ingredients in her products are sourced from local suppliers because she believes that for one small business to survive, it has to receive support from other businesses.Currently, Majola makes her products in the comfort of her home. It takes Majola at least four to five hours to make and package her products.“The time differs with each product. For instance, with soap, you have to let it sit for a few hours or sometimes days after making it,” Majola said.She said that juggling school and running a business was very challenging.“It’s hard to manage time between two things that require my full attention. Finances have also been another challenge I've faced because Yanda Cosmetics is 100% financed by me. I made the conscious decision not to take any loans or financial aid from anyone, that means constantly putting my own money into the business, but I understand that it’s an investment that will pay off soon,” she said.Sunday Independent