DURBAN - Former spy head and prisons boss Arthur Fraser has rubbished reports that he lacks tertiary qualifications, arguing that the article by journalist Jacques Pauw is not only false but vindictive.Pauw penned an article alleging that Fraser had lied about having qualifications and that the prisons boss had “claimed for many years to hold a graduate degree from one of the most prestigious higher learning institutions in the world: the University of London”.In a statement issued by Fraser through his lawyer Eric Mabuza, Fraser said that the allegations by Pauw were a fabrication designed to retaliate for Pauw’s “breach of the law wherein he was recently found by the State Security Agency to be in unlawful possession of state documents.“Ordinarily, Mr. Fraser would not respond to Mr. Pauw. However, these false allegations are so serious and egregious that they cannot be left unchallenged. Although Mr. Fraser does not owe Mr. Pauw any explanation, he wishes to put this matter to rest once and for all.”Mabuza said that having been in various senior positions of leadership in government since the dawn of democracy, the government and the cabinet would have had to satisfy themselves with Fraser’s qualifications.“It is therefore preposterous and shameful for Mr. Pauw and the City Press to suggest that Mr. Fraser does not have the qualifications that are recorded in his CV.”Fraser attached a copy of a statement of confirmation of qualification by the University of Arts, London where he said he had completed his Bachelor of Arts Honours in Film and Television in 1995.“Any member of the public, including Mr. Pauw and Naspers is free to contact the Registrar of the institution for verification.”“Mr. Fraser hopes that after this verification, Mr. Pauw and the City Press will have the humility to apologise to him and the public for lies they turned into front-page in the hope that they would degenerate and humiliate him.”“Mr. Fraser is fully aware of Mr. Pauw’s stratagem and those he works with. Mr. Fraser will make him account in the forthcoming High Court trial, for his lies, fabrications, and attempts to deflect attention from his own misdemeanors.Furthermore, Mabuza mentioned that  Pauw’s lies and fabrications about the Waterfront incident were a matter of public record.Contacted for comment, Pauw had not replied to questions from the Daily News which sought to establish whether he was prepared to apologise for the alleged false report about Fraser.A year ago, Pauw apologised for lying about police stealing money from him and being harassed by the men in blue at a V&A Waterfront restaurant.This was after he had written a column in the Daily Maverick detailing the non-existent harassment."The column in the Daily Maverick created the impression that either the restaurant management, or the waiter that served me, or the V&A Waterfront made a call to the police to have me arrested. It turns out this did not happen. Neither the restaurant nor the Waterfront made any such calls and played no role in my arrest.“I wrote the column because I was emotional, angry, and humiliated by the entire experience. The column was published on Friday afternoon. Upon reflection and additional evidence provided to me, I have realised that there are errors in the column. I now wish to set the record straight.”Pauw apologised and said: “I feel embarrassed about my conduct. In this era of fake news, propaganda, and lack of accountability, I must publicly accept responsibility for my own actions and apologise for them. It is the right thing to do”.Daily News