CAPE TOWN - As police this week confiscated drugs and weapons at Manenberg High School, teachers say they live in fear as they have been threatened with violence by learners on numerous occasions. On Tuesday, police conducted a search on the school premises and confiscated 56 dagga bankies, nine knives, a bullet and a large amount of cigarettes and lighters.Police spokesperson Warrant Officer Joseph Swartbooi said the well-coordinated search was planned between Manenberg police and the management of the school.“The personnel are again encouraged to register criminal cases with the South African Police Service when they are threatened, or their lives are in danger,” Swartbooi said.In a letter to parents on Tuesday, Manenberg High School principal Cameron Williams said this sends a message that certain learners do not come to the school to learn.“Instead, they are here to enrich themselves and their suppliers. They are here to cause grievous bodily harm. They are here to sit in classes high on dagga. This defeats the purpose of the school as a learning institution,” he said. Williams warned parents if their child is found with anything incriminating, criminal action would be taken. “Our staff fear for their lives, as on numerous occasions, we have been threatened with violence by learners, threatened with violence by gangsters, pelted with stones, and threatened to be shot.“As parents, you need to be aware of the circumstances that we deal with on a daily basis,” said Williams.Western Cape Education Department (WCED) spokesperson Unathi Booi said the department’s safe schools sub-directorate was working with the school to address these issues.“I can confirm that a spot check was conducted at the school where a number of items were confiscated, including knives, illegal substances and cigarettes. These were confiscated by the police.“The spot check is one of the safety interventions initiated by the school – aimed to address some of the negative societal issues that face learners and the school community.“Our schools are drug and weapon-free zones,” Booi said. ANC provincial spokesperson on education Khalid Sayed said he would be raising the matter at the legislature. “We call on SAPS to frequently conduct these operations, especially at schools in gang-infested communities. This puts pressure on the WCED to improve safety measures at schools and deployment of more learner resource officers at schools,” he said.The department has appealed to educators, learners and parents to call the WCED safe schools toll-free number to report any violence, abuse, alcohol and drug abuse, vandalism and/or complaints regarding corruption in schools on 0800 45 46 47.Cape Times