DURBAN - A pregnant woman in labour was held up in a traffic jam due to protest action in Buffelsdraai, Durban, on Monday.Residents blockaded Oakford Road which leads to Osindisweni Hospital’s main entrance. Nurses, doctors, and the 28-year-old woman, who were making their way to the hospital were, as a result, stuck in the more than a kilometre-long queue.Reaction Unit South Africa (Rusa) said its paramedics were called in to assist an eight-months pregnant woman who was experiencing severe contractions.“A 28-year-old woman in labour was prevented from being transported to the hospital by protesters in Osindisweni, KZN, this morning (Monday). Frustrated residents from Osindisweni blocked Oakford Road with trees after being left without water since Friday. Traffic built up for nearly a kilometre. Several nurses, doctors, and patients were unable to reach the medical facility.”“A woman went into labour while seated in a taxi. Our medics were dispatched to provide medical assistance to the female who is eight months pregnant and began experiencing severe contractions. On arrival, the female was transported to hospital by ambulance,” said Rusa.MORE ON THISTalk to us, don’t protest, eThekwini Municipality urges residents after Umzinto and Malukazi protestsNearly week-long university protests spread across SAVicinity of UKZN's Howard College a no-go area after students clash with private security over access onto the campusA service delivery protest left nurses and an eight months pregnant woman with severe contractions on their way to a hospital stuck in a kilometre-long traffic queue. Picture: SuppliedKZN Health spokesperson Ntokozo Maphisa said it could not confirm the authenticity of the pregnant woman but condemned any incidents of disruption which resulted in the inaccessibility of health care institutions.“The department condemns in the strongest possible terms any act by any individuals which may result in the disruption of free access in and out of health-care facilities, as this may result in unnecessary and preventable loss of life or health complications. Such an act can never ever be justified.“We can confirm that normal daily operations at Osindisweni Hospital were temporarily disrupted by a blockage due to a community protest that was being staged more than 1.5km away from the hospital. “A contingency plan was put in place which entailed the diversion of Emergency Medical Services to neighbouring health-care facilities. Members of the SAPS and Metro Police attended to the situation, and at 10h15, hospital staff and members of the management team were allowed to pass through. We’re pleased to confirm that normal operations have since resumed at the hospital,” said Maphisa.eThekwini Municipality spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the municipality had experienced a problem with its reservoir water supply.“We are aware of the problem. We had a minor challenge with regard to the line that supplies the reservoir. It has since been sorted. We are now building capacity to this reservoir, and we are appealing to the public to bear with us in the meanwhile. We are supplying the area with water tankers,” said Mayisela.Daily News