CAPE TOWN - The mother of Ashley Oosthuizen, who is facing life imprisonment in Thailand for alleged international drug trafficking, says the family is overwhelmed by the support they have been receiving from the public.Since news of Ashley’s imprisonment broke, her mother, Lynn Blignaut, said messages of support and encouragement had been flowing in.“Everybody has been amazing with their support and their messages of encouragement. I stand in awe to see all the positive reactions, it shows that so many people actually really do care,” she said. After matriculating in 2017, Blignaut’s 22-year-old daughter had moved to Thailand in March 2018 to do a Teaching English as a Foreign Language (TEFL) course, so she could teach kindergarten on the island of Koh Samui.When Oosthuizen was laid off work during the pandemic, Tris Nepps, believed to be her boyfriend and also alleged to be smuggling drugs on the island, had apparently offered her employment at his restaurant.MORE ON THISFamily of SA ‘drug mule’ caution about donationsSA family fights to free daughter jailed in ThailandWhile working at the restaurant she had accepted and signed for a package containing the drug MDMA.She was subsequently reportedly arrested on October 8, 2020, by Thailand police.Ashley received the death penalty, which was later commuted to a life sentence. Blignaut said it had been a difficult time for the family. “I really do miss her, terribly. It just became even more real now, since there is so much coverage on her. It still feels sometimes that it’s not my daughter having to go through this. It is hard to accept it. “But we trust the Lord, He is sustaining her and also providing for her. On our side, we do what we can every day,” she said. Ashley’s father, Andre Oosthuizen, said they remained hopeful. “Last week, when the news came (out), my stress levels went up. I haven’t spoken to her yet, I’m just waiting. Our attorney is confident that there might be some hope. We are hopeful this will get resolved,” he said. The family’s representatives said they were doing everything they could to prove Ashley's innocence. Ashley's appeal has been filed with the Court of Appeals. “It’s also important to note that there is no jury system in Thailand,” the representatives said.“When an appeal is submitted, no additional evidence will be accepted. The Appeals Court will base its judgment on the evidence submitted during the trial. Since the defendant’s lawyer will not be formally notified, they will not be aware of the Appeal Court’s decision until it has been announced,“ they said. Cape Times