DURBAN - eThekwini Municipality encouraged residents in the region to continue reporting faults after the heavy rains and flooding at the weekend. It said any power outages were not related to load shedding. “Residents are therefore encouraged to continue reporting faults using the following platforms: WhatsApp: 076 791 2449, Call: 080 311 1111 and Email: electricity.faults@durban.gov.za.“ The City said eThekwini Electricity Department was working around the clock to restore electricity to many communities across the municipality. “The weekend rains came as technicians were still working on repairs from the April floods. About 3 200 individual faults were reported over the weekend, but a fair percentage of these has since been repaired. Work is continuing.” The municipality reminded residents that a lot of the city’s electrical equipment was submerged in water during the floods and as a result there would be intermittent problems for a while which would lead to outages. “In instances where there are large-scale outages our technicians prioritise faults that affect many customers, a large area, or those faults that enable the restoration of critical services, such as water. This could mean that it may take a while for technicians to attend to faults that impact one or a few customers,” the city said. In La Mercy and uMdloti, electricity infrastructure was severely damaged and mini-substations were washed away, it said. “Repairs are in progress, and power to some of the properties is already restored.” Updates on repairs in other areas: MOST READ:  – Anger over missing eThekwini Municipality workers; colleagues unhappy with city response as search continues – Suspects arrested after vehicle, linked to several cases of car theft in Durban, Ballito, uMhlanga, spotted – Family ‘shaken’ by home invasion in Reservoir Hills; brazen gang forced their way in at gunpoint – Pedestrian killed, 15 pupils injured in Pietermaritzburg crash – Public Alert: Alleged robbery suspect seen wearing an IPSS jacket stolen from an officer THE MERCURY